CSC 428 / CSC 2514h – Human-Computer Interaction Winter 2026
ASSIGNMENT 2: CONTROLLED EXPERIMENT
Usability studies typically evaluate users performing relatively realistic tasks with a given system. While the data
gathered from these studies are invaluable, since the tasks are typically complex and multi-faceted, it is often
difficult to isolate which elements of the task are contributing to problems encountered by the user.
Another method used to obtain concrete, quantitative data about user performance is through controlled
experiments. Here, a complex task is typically broken down into its components and the most important
components are experimentally evaluated. Careful control of the task variables allow for much more precise data
to be obtained, although this is sometimes at the expense of generality. A well designed experiment, however, is
one where the results can be generalized to other uses and, even better, contribute to the development of a
model of user behavior.
DUE DATE: March 10, 23:59 PM
GRADE: 25% of final grade
Description
This assignment is a hands-on exercise in designing, building, conducting, and analyzing a controlled experiment.
In this assignment, you will be investigating techniques that can facilitate the task of pointing and selection. Your
goal is to find the most efficient way for users to select on-screen targets using a computer mouse. You have
narrowed the options down to two techniques, and would also like to compare these techniques to a standard
“point” cursor:
1) Point Cursor: A standard cursor defined by a single 2D point.
2) Area Cursor: A cursor that covers a circular area and can select any target it intersects. If multiple targets are
intersected, the cursor in the middle of the area cursor is used for selection, like a traditional point cursor.
3) Bubble Cursor: A dynamically sized area cursor, that grows and shrinks so that it always selects exactly one target.
Code segments that implement these techniques, with instructions on compilation, will be available on the course
website. In addition, the program will allow you to try out the three techniques. You should familiarize yourself with
the techniques before attempting the rest of the assignment.
Experimental Design
Once you are familiar with how the techniques work, you must design and build an experiment that will allow you
to measure and compare user performance in using these three techniques.
An important part of experimental design is to decide which tasks to evaluate. You must choose an appropriate task
for the participants. Remember the task should define the structure of each trial in the experiment.
Once you choose a task you must choose two additional independent variables for the task which you can vary.
There are many possibilities. Think about what would be most important for the experiment and provide
justifications for your choice. To keep the size of your experiment manageable, each independent variable should
have 3 levels. Together with the 3 selection techniques, your experiment will thus have 3 total independent
variables, resulting in 3 x 3 x 3 = 27 conditions.
You then have to decide how many trials you will have for each condition, and how many blocks of trials for all the
conditions. Your experiment length should be around 30 minutes.
You also have to decide on how you will present the trials (randomization, counter balancing, etc.)
CSC 428 / CSC 2514h – Human-Computer Interaction Winter 2026
Your design should be a within-subjects full factorial design: meaning that all subjects do all conditions for all
techniques.
Coding it up
Once you've designed the experiment, you need to write some code to present the task and conditions to your
subjects, and record their performance.
Using the framework given in the sample code and discussed in tutorial, implement your experimental design. Note
that the sample code is indeed a sample: you are expected to make changes to the code to implement your design.
This may involve modifying the actual techniques, if required for your chosen independent variables.
Be sure to allow for rest periods.
You also need to figure out what your dependent variables are, and how you will handle errors that occur.
Your software should implement all of these aspects of the experiment – once the experiment is started, you
shouldn’t need to manually intervene.
Try out your experimental setup yourself first, and ensure all bugs are ironed out, before subjecting others to it!
Participants
You should have three participants do your experiment. You should discuss in your report what a preferable number
of participants would be if you had the time/resources.
Consent Form
When conducting studies involving human subjects, you should always inform participants of the study protocol and
goals, and get their consent before starting the experiment. For this course assignment verbal consent is sufficient.
Participants should be made aware that this is a course assignment and not a research study, and that their
participation is voluntary.
Running the Study
The study should be run on a desktop or laptop. A mouse should be used for input. Find a quiet space to conduct
the study, so that participants are not distracted. If you can, you should run the study in the same or similar locations
for each participant to eliminate any confounds.
Hypotheses and Analysis
Before running your experiment, you should develop a set of hypotheses. You do not want a list of hypotheses for
every combination of condition and dependent variable. Think about what the most important questions may be
surrounding your study and what your associated hypotheses are. These hypotheses could be based on models
(GOMS, Fitts' law, Hick's Law, etc.), but you do not need to do any formal analysis of these models.
After running the experiment and collecting the data, you need to analyze the data. You should present the basic
descriptive statistics and perform an analysis of variance to compare performance between the techniques, the
effects of each of the independent variables, and any interaction events. You can do the analysis by any statistical
analysis package you have access to. The supported package that will be taught in the tutorials will be Eric-Jan
Wagenmakers’ software JASP (https://jasp-stats.org/), which is freely available on Windows, macOS, and Linux.
Submission and Grading
Code: On the course website, submit your code as a single zip file. Your code may be tested to make sure it works,
and to determine if you could have obtained the results you discuss in your report with the experimental setup you
have created. Any special instructions to run your code must be included in a README.md file.
Report: Submit a PDF report of not more than 5 pages, single spaced, 10pt font (excluding appendices). Here's a
guideline on what to include in your report and the marking scheme that will be used:
Section 1: Introduction/motivation (5/100)
Give a very brief overview on the topic and what it is you are evaluating. Make sure you tell the reader the point of
your work!
Section 2: Methodology (30/100)
Explain what you did. Discuss your tasks, conditions, experimental design, procedure, and participants. Justify all
design decisions you made. You should also describe you experimental software, and how dependent variables were
calculated and saved.
Section 3: Hypotheses (10/100)
Discuss and justify the hypotheses you came up with for the experiment. In other words, what did you expect to find
in your experimental data, and why?
Section 4: Results and Analysis (20/100)
Present the results of your experiment, and the accompanying analysis. Choose appropriate ways to present your
data. You should refer to the lecture notes and the reading below which provide best practices. Bar and/or line
charts may be appropriate for some data, while summary tables may be better for others. Ensure that you present
descriptive results, significant effects, and interaction effects for the dependent variables.
Section 4: Discussion (10/100)
Discuss how your actual results compare to your hypotheses. Account for any discrepancies and try to explain why
you obtained the results that you did. Discuss how your results may have been affected by the within-subjects
design. Would a between-subjects design have been a better choice? Why?
Section 5: Conclusion (5/100)
Summarize what you found and make recommendations. This can include discussing new possible techniques that
you didn’t test, but based on your results, may be promising.
Appendix 1: Raw data (5/100)
Include a printout of any statistic program scripts plus 10 lines of your logged data, and the printout of the statistic
program output files or any other result file you have generated. Your appendix should also include a reference
section for any papers, articles, or books which you may choose to cite in your report, as well as the signed
protocol and consent forms from your participants.
CSC 428 / CSC 2514h – Human-Computer Interaction Winter 2026
Appendix 2: Use of AI (5/100)
In this appendix, briefly describe if and how you used generative AI tools at different stages of this assignment,
such as during experimental design, task selection, study planning, coding, data analysis, or report writing.
Presentation and Formatting (10/100)
In addition to meeting the requirements outlined in the above section, your work will also be assessed based on the
quality of the discussion, formatting, and presentation. Marks will be deducted for formatting and grammatical
errors. Studies like this are often carried out so that the results can be published in academic conferences or journals.
As such, it is critical that they are presented in a clear and consumable fashion. Research papers are often rejected
because of poor writing and/or presentation! If a reviewer cannot understand the presentation, they may not be
able to properly assess the research results.
Useful References:
1. David Martin. 2007. Doing Psychology Experiments.
2. Scott MacKenzie. 2013. Human-Computer Interaction: An Empirical Research Perspective.
3. Mark Gardener. 2012. Beginning R: The statistical programming language.
4. Jacob Wobbrock. 2011. Practical Statistics for HCI